[FLINK-39377][table] Add initial implementation of ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness (#27928)
apache/flink: docs/content/docs/dev/table/testing/ptf_test_harness.md

> ---

Reviewer: The testing/ directory is missing an _index.md (needed to show the section in the sidebar). Could you add one following the pattern of the sibling directories like functions/?

title: "Testing Process Table Functions"
weight: 10
type: docs
---
<!--
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

> # Testing Process Table Functions

Reviewer 2: Can we move this to:
https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/dev/table/functions/ptfs/

I know this page is already long, but it is also very nice to everything you need to know around PTFs in one page.

The `ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness` provides a lightweight unit testing framework for Process Table

> Functions (PTFs). It allows you to test PTF logic without starting a full Flink cluster. It is useful

Reviewer 2: PTF can also run locally without a full Flink cluster. This is more for unit testing.
```suggestion
Functions (PTFs). It allows you to unit test PTF logic. It is useful
```

        collect(Row.of(value * 2));
    }
}

// Test
@Test
void testDoublePTF() throws Exception {
    try (ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness<Row> harness =
            ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness.ofClass(DoublePTF.class)
                    .withTableArgument("input", DataTypes.of("ROW<value INT>"))
                    .build()) {

        harness.processElement(Row.of(5));
        harness.processElement(Row.of(10));

        List<Row> output = harness.getOutput();
        assertThat(output).hasSize(2);
        assertThat(output.get(0)).isEqualTo(Row.of(10));
        assertThat(output.get(1)).isEqualTo(Row.of(20));
    }
}
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

{{< top >}}

## Common Testing Scenarios

### Testing Row-Semantic Tables

Use `.withTableArgument()` to configure the input table schema:

{{< tabs "row-semantic" >}}
{{< tab "Java" >}}
```java
@DataTypeHint("ROW<value INT>")
public class PassthroughPTF extends ProcessTableFunction<Row> {
    public void eval(@ArgumentHint(ArgumentTrait.ROW_SEMANTIC_TABLE) Row input) {
        collect(input);
    }
}

@Test
void testPassthrough() throws Exception {
    try (ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness<Row> harness =

>             ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness.ofClass(PassthroughPTF.class)

Reviewer 2: nit: use two spaces in examples to keep the page readable and lines short

        }
    }
}

@Test
void testMultiTable() throws Exception {
    try (ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness<Row> harness =
            ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness.ofClass(JoinPTF.class)
                    .withTableArgument("left", DataTypes.of("ROW<id INT, name STRING>"))
                    .withPartitionBy("left", "id")
                    .withTableArgument("right", DataTypes.of("ROW<id INT, city STRING>"))
                    .withPartitionBy("right", "id")
                    .build()) {

        // Use processElementForTable() to target specific tables
        harness.processElementForTable("left", Row.of(1, "Alice"));
        harness.processElementForTable("right", Row.of(1, "Berlin"));

        List<Row> output = harness.getOutput();
        assertThat(output.get(0)).isEqualTo(Row.of(1, null, "LEFT: +I[1, Alice]"));
        assertThat(output.get(1)).isEqualTo(Row.of(null, 1, "RIGHT: +I[1, Berlin]"));
    }
}
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Testing with Scalar Arguments

Use `.withScalarArgument()` to configure scalar parameter values:

{{< tabs "scalar-args" >}}
{{< tab "Java" >}}
```java
@DataTypeHint("ROW<value INT>")

> public class FilterPTF extends ProcessTableFunction<Row> {

Reviewer 2: nit: do we also want to update at least one of the examples to non-Row. Just to show that also `ProcessTableFunction<Integer>` in this example is possible and is auto wrapped in the output.

    public void eval(
            @ArgumentHint(ArgumentTrait.ROW_SEMANTIC_TABLE) Row input,

>             @ArgumentHint(ArgumentTrait.SCALAR) int threshold) {

Reviewer 2: For simplification, this is not necessary
```suggestion
            int threshold) {
```

                    .withTableArgument("input", DataTypes.of("ROW<value INT>"))
                    .withScalarArgument("threshold", 50)  // Configure scalar value
                    .build()) {

        harness.processElement(Row.of(30));
        harness.processElement(Row.of(70));

        List<Row> output = harness.getOutput();
        assertThat(output).containsExactly(Row.of(70));
    }
}
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

**Scalar-Only PTFs**: For PTFs with only scalar arguments, use `invoke()` to trigger evaluation:

{{< tabs "scalar-only" >}}
{{< tab "Java" >}}
```java
@DataTypeHint("ROW<sum INT>")
public class AddPTF extends ProcessTableFunction<Row> {
    public void eval(
            @ArgumentHint(ArgumentTrait.SCALAR) int a,
            @ArgumentHint(ArgumentTrait.SCALAR) int b) {
        collect(Row.of(a + b));
    }
}

@Test
void testScalarOnly() throws Exception {
    try (ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness<Row> harness =
            ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness.ofClass(AddPTF.class)
                    .withScalarArgument("a", 5)
                    .withScalarArgument("b", 7)
                    .build()) {

>         harness.invoke();  // Use invoke() instead of processElement()

Reviewer 2: Maybe better naming?
```suggestion
        harness.process();
```
What is the error behavior if you call this method but there are actually table args?

Author: It throws an invalid state exception, with `process() is only for scalar-only PTFs. This PTF has table arguments. Use processElement() or processElementForTable() instead.`

            ) Row input) {
        int value = input.getFieldAs("value");
        collect(Row.of(value * 2));
    }
}

@Test
void testInlineType() throws Exception {
    try (ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness<Row> harness =
            ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness.ofClass(InlineTypePTF.class).build()) {

        harness.processElement(Row.of(5));
        assertThat(harness.getOutput()).containsExactly(Row.of(10));
    }
}

// Option 2: Builder configuration
@Test
void testBuilderType() throws Exception {
    try (ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness<Row> harness =
            ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness.ofClass(DoublePTF.class)
                    .withTableArgument("input", DataTypes.of("ROW<value INT>"))
                    .build()) {

        harness.processElement(Row.of(5));
        assertThat(harness.getOutput()).containsExactly(Row.of(10));
    }
}
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

**Structured Types**: The harness supports structured POJO types in addition to `Row`, both as PTF inputs
and outputs:

{{< tabs "pojo-types" >}}
{{< tab "Java" >}}
```java
public static class Customer {
    public String name;
    public int age;
}

> @DataTypeHint("ROW<name STRING, age INT>")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// no annotation necessary, all types can be derived from class information
```

public class CustomerPTF extends ProcessTableFunction<Customer> {
    public void eval(@ArgumentHint(ArgumentTrait.ROW_SEMANTIC_TABLE) Customer c) {
        collect(c);
    }
}

@Test
void testPOJO() throws Exception {
    try (ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness<Customer> harness =
            ProcessTableFunctionTestHarness.ofClass(CustomerPTF.class)

>                     .withTableArgument("input", DataTypes.of(Customer.class))

Reviewer 2: Should not not be necessary if the type is explicit in the function?
```suggestion
                    .withTableArgument("input")
```
